
## why any delay at all?
Since the whole point of the Optimistic Rollup is that the L1 isn't actually executing the L2 chain, the L1 doesn't know if this claim is valid or not. ZK Rollups solve this problem by giving the L1 a cryptographic proof that a given claim is valid. Optimistic Rollups solve this problem by requiring that claims must pass through a  **challenge process**  before they can be considered valid. Each claim must wait a  **challenge period**  during which a  **challenger**  can state that the claim is invalid. If someone challenges a claim, then some on-chain game begins that determines whether or not the claim is actually valid.

Because it can take time for someone to detect an invalid claim and submit the challenge, it's inevitable that we need the challenge period to be greater than zero. After all, if the duration of the challenge period were zero seconds then there would be no chance to submit a challenge. Our question then becomes: how long should the challenge period be?


## Malicious actors

Our 100 block number establishes a simple lower bound, but this lower bound only really applies if neither party is being malicious. In Optimistic Rollup land, the stakes are  **much**  higher. An attacker can use an invalid claim to potentially steal hundreds of millions if not billions of USD-valued assets. An attacker that could earn this much money should also be willing to  **spend**  up to the earnings in order to execute the attack. An attacker who's confident they'll be able to make $1b should be willing to part with up to $1b to execute the attack.

What could this attacker do with their money? Well, it's the attacker's goal to prevent challengers from being able to include their challenge transactions on-chain. After all, if the challenge transactions make it through, then the attack fails. The attacker essentially has three potential tactics here:

1.  Run direct DoS attacks on the challengers to prevent them from being able to interact with the L1 network in the first place
2.  Spam the L1 network with expensive transactions to drive up the gas price and prevent challengers from being able to transact
3.  Censor challengers directly by controlling a large number of validators

In practice, it's likely that a motivated attacker would use some combination of all three of these attack vectors to prevent challengers from being able to interact. We often ignore vector #1 because it's relatively easy to prevent and hard to quantify, but vectors #2 and #3 are really what we need to look out for.

Now we land at the underlying principle that, in theory, should determine the length of the Optimistic Rollup challenge period:  **the challenge period must be greater than the amount of time that the attacker can censor all available challengers.**


[Why is the Optimistic Rollup challenge period 7 days? (kelvinfichter.com)](https://kelvinfichter.com/pages/thoughts/challenge-periods/)

