# Glossary

## Yield-Bearing Token
A yield-bearing token is a general term for any token that generates yield. Examples include stETH, GLP, gDAI, or even liquidity tokens like Aura rETH-WETH.

## Accounting Asset
This is the asset that a yield-bearing token appreciates in value against. It is shown in brackets at the end of each market name.

## SY = Standardized Yield
https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-5115

SY is a token standard (EIP-5115) created by the Pendle team. It wraps any yield-bearing token to provide a standardized interface for interacting with its yield-generating mechanism. SY is a technical component that users do not interact with directly.

## PT = Principal Token
PT gives you the right to the principal of the underlying yield-bearing token, which can be redeemed after maturity. For example, if you have 1 PT-wstETH (stETH) with a 1-year maturity, you can redeem 1 stETH after one year. PT can be traded at any time, even before it matures.

## YT = Yield Token
YT gives you the right to all the yield generated by the underlying yield-bearing token in real-time. The accrued yield can be claimed at any time from the Pendle Dashboard. For instance, if you own 1 YT-wstETH (stETH) and stETH has an average yield of 5% for the year, you will have accrued 0.05 stETH by the end of the year. YT can be traded at any time, even before maturity.

## Maturity
Maturity is the date when PT becomes fully redeemable for the underlying asset and YT stops accruing yield. An asset can have multiple maturity dates, each with its own independent market. Consequently, the implied yield of an asset can vary across different maturities.

## Underlying APY
Underlying APY is the 7-day moving average yield rate of the underlying asset. This method provides a more accurate indication of the underlying yield over a period, helping traders to better estimate the Future Average Underlying APY.

## Implied APY
Implied APY is the market's consensus on the future APY of an asset. It is calculated based on the ratio of the price of YT to PT. The formula is:

`Implied APY = [ ( 1 + YT Price / PT Price ) ^ (365 / Days to expiry) ] - 1`

When used with the Underlying APY, Implied APY can help determine the relative value of assets like YT and PT at their current prices, aiding traders in their strategies. The value of Implied Yield is numerically the same as the Fixed Yield APY.

## Fixed APY
Fixed APY is the guaranteed yield you will receive by holding PT. This value is numerically equivalent to the Implied APY.

## Long Yield APY
Long Yield APY is the approximate annualized return from buying YT at its current price, assuming the underlying APY remains constant. This value can be negative, which means the total value of all future yield based on the Underlying APY will be less than the cost of buying YT.

## Exchange Rate
This refers to the exchange rate between the interest-bearing token and its accounting asset.

## Watermark Rate
This is the highest recorded exchange rate between the IBT and its accounting asset. If the exchange rate falls below this level, PT will redeem for less than its actual value at maturity, and YT will stop earning yield.