Liquid Staking
==============

Liquid staking is a software solution allowing users to directly participate in Proof of Stake networks while still maintaining liquidity and the ability to rehypothecate their staked assets. Liquid staking protocols operate in a decentralized manner and are governed by smart contracts.

Liquid staking Relies on validators to bond a specific amount of a cryptoassets as collateral and it aims to secure the blockchain by contributing to the ecosystem. One of the risks in liquid staking would be misbehaving validators. If they misbehave, they will get slashed which means Economic penalty leading to collateral loss.

When it comes to regulations, Liquid staking protocols are subject to blockchain network governance. They may be indirectly influenced by financial regulations depending on their interaction with the traditional financial system.


Liquid Staking Receipt Token
============================

This type of token is a programmatically minted cryptoasset that represents a user’s direct ownership or stake in a given blockchain protocol employing PoS consensus mechanism.

Liquid Staking receipt tokens are not as structured as traditional Securities. They are representation of underlying staked assets. These tokens can be transferred, stored and traded in other DeFi protocols or supported dApps.

Liquid Stakig Receipt tokens are associated with financial variables such as staking rewards and token value. They are synthetic crypto assets which have a representational nature. They are created and managed through smart contracts and staking pools.

[stETH] or Staked ETH is an example of a liquid staking receipt token. Liquid Staking Receipt tokens enhance liquidity through secondary market trading. For example, Users rehypothecate their stETH on various DEXes such as [Uniswap](https://uniswap.org) or [PancakeSwap](https://pancakeswap.finance). These tokens can be used as collateral in DeFi borrowing and lending protocols as well. For example, users can collateralize stETH on [Aave Companies](https://aave.com) via smart contract interactions.

SINO
====

SINO, short for** Staking in Name Only**, represents a recently coined term encompassing processes that technically qualify as lending but are labeled as staking. This classification often applies to various yield-generating activities and earn programs within the cryptocurrency realm. Notably, crypto service providers, ranging from centralized and decentralized exchanges to custodial wallets, may introduce earn or staking programs.

In these programs, users commit specific cryptocurrencies, locking them up to accrue interest over time. Service providers then utilize these locked-up deposits for lending to margin traders or staking in Proof of Stake networks, subsequently sharing the generated profits with depositors in the form of interest. [Yield farming](https://www.coindesk.com/learn/yield-farming-what-is-it-and-how-does-it-work/#:~:text=Yield%20farming%20refers%20to%20depositing,trading%20pool%20to%20provide%20liquidity.), a common practice in these scenarios, typically takes place on decentralized finance (DeFi) platforms.

PoSI
====

PoSI is the abbreviation of “Providers of Staking Infrastructure”. They are basically Blockchain nodes which validate new blocks on the Blockchain’s ledger. PoSIs compete with each other to add the next block. Validating transactions and safeguarding the integrity of transactions is their responsibility. PoSIs verify that there are no irregularities in the upcoming block of transactions and they propose a block of transactions which only contains valid transactions.

Moreover, they set up and maintain the security of hardware and IT for token holders. PoSIs will be incenvitized by getting a portion of the staking rewards paid to the token holders. They will ensue the blockchain security by establishing validity, guaranteeing availability and monitoring the accuracy of transactions.

### Mining vs Liquidity Farming vs Staking

While often compared, staking, mining, and farming refer to distinct activities in cryptocurrency:

*   **Mining** applies work and compute power to solve cryptographic puzzles and add new blocks to a blockchain. Miners earn block rewards and transaction fees.
*   **Liquidity Farming** involves locking cryptocurrencies into protocols to provide liquidity and earn fees on trades. Popular in DeFi.
*   **Staking** secures crypto holdings to validate transactions and propose blocks based on token ownership. Stakers earn a percentage of transaction fees and inflationary block rewards.